---
layout: post
title: "Delivering Hashrate to Market Markets"
image: assets/BC_Logo_.png
---

Providing futures contracts for hashrate has proven to be a challenge
in the current mining ecosystem. Hashrate [tokens by
Blockstream](qhttps://www.coindesk.com/blockstream-security-token-bitcoin-hashrate-payable-bitcoin),
[poolin](https://mars.poolin.fi/) and
[binance](https://www.binance.com/en/support/announcement/ccc3db0c88734132b07ce4c2e02cf973)
are some of the early attempts to provide financial contracts for
miners. The problem with these contracts is that they are opaque and
can only be traded OTC - often times only useful for the pool
participants. In this post we provide an alternative to such closed
systems. We utilise the shares broadcast on braidpool's P2P network to
enable miners to prove they generated those shares. We describe how
single use seals can be used to trade these shares in an open market.

# Delivering Shares To Market Makers #

We present a protocol to deliver miners shares from braidpool, a
decentralised mining pool. The shares are delivered with proof of
ownership and once delivered to a buyer they can not be delivered to a
different buyer, i.e. we prevent double spends. The buyer can further
sell the shares following the same protocol it uses to buy the shares.

For the sake of this document, we assume we have a DAG of shares
generated by miners and publicly visible on a peer to peer network. We
also assume there is an accepted rewards distribution algorithm based
on the DAG of share. See [BraidPool
Proposal](https://github.com/pool2win/braidpool/blob/main/proposal/proposal.pdf)
for the current status on the proposal for these.

# Trading Shares Using Bitcoin #

We argue that trading shares doesn't require a new blockchain and we
can instead use existing well understood techniques to enable trading
of these shares. Building a new blockchain poses substantial
engineering challenges that we seek to avoid.

To provide transfer of shares without double spends we build on ideas
of [Single Use
Seals](https://petertodd.org/2017/scalable-single-use-seal-asset-transfer),
which is also being put to use in [RGB](https://rgb-org.github.io/)
and the
[RGB-LNP](https://github.com/LNP-BP/LNPBPs/blob/master/lnpbp-0010.md)
specifications.

To transfer shares from miner to a market maker we use a
[PayJoin](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/PayJoin) transaction. This
enables atomic delivery of shares by miners.

# Share Delivery By Miner #

A miner can make a 'delivery' of shares to a market maker when
exercising a futures contract. To do so, the miner has to prove the
following to the market maker:

1. **Ownership** - the miner selling the shares is the one that mined
   those shares, and
2. **No Double Spend** - the shares being delivered have not already
   been delivered to anyone else.

We describe the delivery protocol in the next sections and show how
the protocol provides these properties. First we describe the
structure of a share.

## Shares ##

A share's header contains all the details required to build a DAG but
for the purposes of the protocol presented here we focus on the
components that help with the delivery of shares. A share header
includes a 'Share Seal' that prevents a miner from double spending the
share coin.

| Syntax            | Description                                                                             |
| ----------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  |
| Hash              | Hash of the block found as share.                                                       |
| Nonce             | The nonce found as the share.                                                           |
| Timestamp         | UNIX timestamp for the block found.                                                     |
| Share Seal        | A bitcoin UTXO.                                                                         |

Before a miner broadcasts a share to the decentralise mining network,
it can optionally add a 'Share Seal' to the share's header. This Share
Seal is a bitcoin UTXO that the miner has to spend as a part of the
protocol to deliver the share to a buyer. We call this a Seal, since
that is terminology used in [Single Use
Seals](https://petertodd.org/2017/scalable-single-use-seal-asset-transfer).

Once a Share Seal in a Share Header has been spent in a bitcoin
transaction, the shares are "sold" and no other bitcoin transaction
can spend these again.

![sold-shares](/assets/sold-shares.png)

The figure above shows how we can determine that shares have been sold
or not. The shares 1, 2 and 3 are sold as their Share Seal has been
spent and is no longer in the bitcoin UTXO set.

When a share is found by a miner, the share is broadcast to the p2p
network so that the share can be included in the DAG of shares.
   
Recall that making sure that other miners in the DAG have your share
is how miners can make sure they get rewarded for the share when the
next block is found. See [BraidPool
Proposal](https://github.com/kulpreet/braidpool-proposal/blob/main/proposal.pdf)
for details.

## Shares Delivery ##

The miner and the buyer execute a PayJoin to atomically execute a
trade where the miner transfers sends shares to the market maker and
the market maker in turn sends bitcoin to the miner.

The protocol can be described as consisting of three phases:

1. Before Mining,
2. During Mining, and 
3. Delivery

### Before Mining ###

Before a miner starts mining shares it generates a UTXO and makes sure
this UTXO is not spent up to the time of selling shares to a market
maker. A miner can deliver as many shares as they want with a single
UTXO as long as they included the UTXO as the 'Share Seal' in the
Share Header. These shares and seals can be delivered in any
combination.

### During Mining ###

When mining a share, the miner sets the 'Share Seal' in the Share
Header to the UTXO generated in the previous step. At this stage the
miners can decide on the granularity of the shares in each
seal. Miners are free to choose a seal for each hours worth of shares
or a weeks worth of shares. The trade off is the ability to delivery
smaller set of shares, but at a higher number of bitcoin transactions.

### Delivery ###

To deliver shares the miner spends the UTXO from the 'before mining'
stage in such a way that the market maker can verify that the shares
have not already been delivered to anyone else. The market maker can
also validate that the shares were generated by the miner.

When a market maker sees the Share Seal UTXO\_1 spent on the bitcoin
blockchain it knows that shares using UTXO\_1 as a Share Seal can no
longer be delivered to any other market marker.

The figure below shows how a miner includes 'UTXO 1' as a Share Seal
in Shares 1 to 8, and therefore is selling those shares as part of the
bitcoin transaction.

![delivery-with-seal](/assets/delivery-with-seal.png)

The Miner also proves the ownership of shares as the miner that used
UTXO\_1 as a Share Seal is able to spend UTXO\_1.

## Atomic Delivery of Shares ##

The above delivery protocol doesn't guarantee atomicity. A buyer can
receive shares from a miner and refuse to deliver the payment for the
shares.

We make use of a [PayJoin](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/PayJoin)
transaction to make this trade atomic. The following sequence of steps
show how the miner can trade shares for bitcoin using a PayJoin
transaction.

1. Miner and Market Maker agree on the amounts of shares and bitcoin
   to exchange. The Miner sends the Share Headers it will be selling
   to the Market Maker.
2. Miner and Market Maker then exchange the bitcoin addresses where
   they want to receive their payment.
3. The Miner creates a bitcoin transaction spending the Share Seal
   UTXO and two outputs. One of these outputs pays the agreed upon
   bitcoin to the Miner and the other includes Buyers Seal in the
   op_return field.
4. The Miner signs the transaction by signing the inputs and the two
   outputs.
4. The Miner sends the signed transaction to the Market Maker.
5. The Market Maker verifies that the number of shares being agreed
   upon include the UTXO being spent by the Miner.
6. Once the Market Maker has verified the shares and the Share Seal,
   it adds an input and signs the inputs and outputs of the
   transaction. 
7. The Market Maker then sends the transaction back to the Miner.
8. The Miner finally signs the updated inputs again and broadcasts the
   fully signed transaction.

The above sequence works to build a PayJoin transaction with the only
extra details in Step 3, where the Miner must spend the Share Seal and
must include the Buyer's Seal in the op_return of the output sent to
the Buyer.

![payjoin-spending-seal](/assets/payjoin-spending-seal.png)

The figure above shows a PayJoin transaction delivering Miner's share
with three different Share Seals.


### Properties ###

We now show how the PayJoin above satisfies the ownership and no
double spend properties.

**Ownership**: When the Miner spends the Share Seal during the PayJoin
transaction the Miner inconclusively proves it controls those
shares. A miner can try to construct a PayJoin transaction with
another Miner's Share Seal, but the requirement that the Miner spend
the UTXO included in the Shares headers is verified by the Market
Maker before it signs the transaction in Step 5.

**No double spend**: The spending of the Share Seal marks the shares
as spent. When a buyer receives the list of shares in Step 1, it can
verify from the DAG of shares that they are valid. It can also check
that the Share Seal UTXO hasn't already been spent. 

The Miner can construct concurrent PayJoin transactions with multiple
Market Makers, but only one of the transactions will be accepted on
the Bitcoin network.

### Trading Shares: An Open Market ###

If we want to support the ability for buyers to sell shares to other
parties, we can support that by extending the Seal analogy. Once the
Market Maker has ownership of shares by virtue of the data in the
op_return of the PayJoin output, we can extend the protocol to
recognise this ownership and then transfer ownership to a secondary
buyer in a new PayJoin transaction.

The RGB protocol builds on Seals to provide off chain assets and we
could use RGB to build the decentralised mining pool's shares delivery
mechanism. However, RGB is not yet ready for production use and we
continue to work on our own simpler use case described herein.

### Scale ###

There is a question on how the system might scale if each miner has to
broadcast a bitcoin transaction to deliver shares. There's two
responses to it:

1. A miner can use the same Share Seal for a day's or a week's worth
   of shares and deliver them in a single bitcoin transaction to the
   buyer.
2. A miner could create a PayJoin with multiple inputs that spend
   different Share Seals to bulk sell shares.


# Future Work #

We can switch away from using op\_return and instead use the
"[sign-to-contract](https://blog.eternitywall.com/2018/04/13/sign-to-contract/)"
commitments to transfer ownership of seals from Miner to Market
Maker. These types of commitments are also [used by
RGB](https://github.com/LNP-BP/LNPBPs/blob/master/lnpbp-0001.md) to
record transfer of asset ownerships. However, we can use op\_return an
MVP of BraidPool and then switch to more advanced commitment systems
as users demands.

# Conclusion #

In this document we outlined a protocol for Miners to deliver shares
to a Market Maker. The protocol builds on the idea of Single Use Seals
and doesn't require a new blockchain to manage and track shares. We
believe that enabling an economy of shares right on top of the Bitcoin
blockchain reinforces the utility of Bitcoin, while providing a much
needed tool for miners and market makers alike.


This post was first published as a
[gist](https://gist.github.com/kulpreet/19927c7188a4224ce2de43efb3c69370).
